DRAFT: v1 Spec (#805)
ngrok/ngrok-operator: specs/README.md

# ngrok-operator Specifications

This directory contains the v1 specifications for the ngrok-operator. These specs document all public-facing behavior, APIs, and configuration — serving as the authoritative reference for what the operator does and how it behaves.

## Purpose

1. **Implementation planning**: Provides a baseline for planning changes as we work toward v1.
2. **Bug vs. unspecified behavior**: Defines expected behavior so we can distinguish bugs from unspecified behavior.
3. **Living documentation**: Serves as the canonical reference for the operator's public surface area.

## Glossary

| Term | Definition | Details |
|------|-----------|---------|
| **Agent Endpoint** | An endpoint backed by an ngrok agent tunnel running inside the cluster. Created as an `AgentEndpoint` CR. | [crds/agentendpoint.md](crds/agentendpoint.md) |

> | **Bindings** | A feature that projects external ngrok endpoints into the cluster as local Kubernetes Services, enabling ngrok-to-cluster traffic. | [features/bindings.md](features/bindings.md) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Bindings** | A feature that projects private ngrok endpoints into the cluster as local Kubernetes Services, enabling pods to send requests to them without those endpoints being on the public internet. | [features/bindings.md](features/bindings.md) |
```

> | **Bindings** | A feature that projects external ngrok endpoints into the cluster as local Kubernetes Services, enabling ngrok-to-cluster traffic. | [features/bindings.md](features/bindings.md) |

Reviewer: The other items in this table say how they are created via specific CRs or annotations. It might be worth noting how here as well. Something like "Both Agent Endpoints and Cloud Endpoints can be bound to kubernetes with a bindings=kubernetes value and can be created via CRs, the api, dashboard, etc with the same k8s cluster or other cluster, etc" probably more concisely though :)

Reviewer: they also all link to more detailed docs so maybe the docs cover it fine

| **Drain / Draining** | The process of gracefully removing ngrok API resources when the operator is uninstalled. Triggered by deletion of the `KubernetesOperator` CR. | [features/draining.md](features/draining.md) |
| **Driver** | An internal pattern used by Ingress and Gateway API controllers that collects state from multiple resources and materializes the combined state as ngrok endpoints. | [controllers/ingress.md](controllers/ingress.md) |
| **Endpoint Pooling** | Allows multiple endpoints to share the same public URL, distributing traffic across them. Controlled via the `ngrok.com/pooling-enabled` annotation. | [annotations.md](annotations.md) |
| **Mapping Strategy** | Controls which ngrok endpoint resources are created: `endpoints` (AgentEndpoint only) or `endpoints-verbose` (CloudEndpoint + internal AgentEndpoint). | [annotations.md](annotations.md) |
| **Traffic Policy** | A set of rules (rate limiting, header manipulation, authentication, etc.) applied to ngrok endpoints. Defined as an `TrafficPolicy` CR or inline JSON. | [features/traffic-policy.md](features/traffic-policy.md) |

> ## Directory Structure

Reviewer: Gonna leave a list of notes here for additional docs we might consider adding that I think of while reading. 

The first that comes to mind is something documenting the high level architecture of the 3 different deployable components and their differences in usage of leader election, namespace scoping, etc

Author: I'm not keen on calling out the components in the spec for "how" it should work. Feels like an implementation detail IMO. Wdyt?

Reviewer: yep, I think from reading through all this that we just want a separate set of internal/architecture docs for specific things

### [helm/](helm/) — Helm Chart Configuration

- [common.md](helm/common.md) — Top-level structure, global defaults, ngrok config, credentials, config file system
- [operator.md](helm/operator.md) — API manager (`apiManager`) deployment values
- [agent.md](helm/agent.md) — Agent deployment values
- [bindings-forwarder.md](helm/bindings-forwarder.md) — Bindings forwarder (`bindingsForwarder`) deployment values
- [features.md](helm/features.md) — Feature flags, feature config, drain/domain policies, cleanup hook

### [features/](features/) — Cross-Cutting Features

- [draining.md](features/draining.md) — Drain policy, cleanup hook, uninstall behavior
- [multi-install.md](features/multi-install.md) — Multiple operator installations in one cluster
- [ingress.md](features/ingress.md) — Kubernetes Ingress feature
- [gateway-api.md](features/gateway-api.md) — Kubernetes Gateway API feature
- [bindings.md](features/bindings.md) — Endpoint bindings feature
- [high-availability.md](features/high-availability.md) — Replicas, leader election, PDB
- [traffic-policy.md](features/traffic-policy.md) — Traffic policy resolution across controllers

> - [namespace-watching.md](features/namespace-watching.md) — Namespace scoping configuration

Reviewer: I think this is good for now, and this is just a hunch/though, but I'm thinking long term we'll want more of the cross-cutting specs and less "helm" specs. Like most of these features have some impact across the stack from the helm values to install, how the crd is used, and how the reconciler works and deals with different scenarios. It feels like those should be documented mostly in here. 

It probably still makes sense to have some helm specs, but I think it might not get into every helm value for the agent-manager for example, but instead document how we want something like "Global helm values that can be overriden per component. and separatation of k8s configs from controller configs" and might use some examples

Author: Resolving as it was called out good for now. I'm leaning towards we'll have to keep helm specs around as its an API of its own, but we'll likely adjust and course correct as needed.

### [crds/](crds/) — Custom Resource Definitions

- [common.md](crds/common.md) — Shared patterns: conditions, finalizers, shared types
- [agentendpoint.md](crds/agentendpoint.md) — AgentEndpoint (`ngrok.com`)
- [cloudendpoint.md](crds/cloudendpoint.md) — CloudEndpoint (`ngrok.com`)
- [kubernetesoperator.md](crds/kubernetesoperator.md) — KubernetesOperator (`ngrok.com`)
- [trafficpolicy.md](crds/trafficpolicy.md) — TrafficPolicy (`ngrok.com`)
- [domain.md](crds/domain.md) — Domain (`ngrok.com`)
- [ippolicy.md](crds/ippolicy.md) — IPPolicy (`ngrok.com`)

> - [boundendpoint.md](crds/boundendpoint.md) — BoundEndpoint (`ngrok.com`)

Reviewer: Nit: i was confused what all the ngrok.com stuff was for. I'm guessing this is supposed to be the api group and is shown here as a relic of the fact that the existing system is not consistent? might be worth removing if they are consistent in this new world

Author: TODO: remove the `ngrok.com` here
